

Cryptozoology + suggestions
I have reintroduced cryptozoology into the template on the grounds that although its standing within Zoology is controversial, a number of Zoologists,  consider it to be a legitimate branch of of the discipline comprising a unique set of research methodologies (See eg, Karl Shuker, Darren Naish, Charles Paxton, Edward Bousfield etc), plus the field was founded by a Zoologist - Bernard Heuvelmans. 
In my humble oppinion, owing to the fact that the targets of cryptozoologists are physical putative animals known through non-autoptic evidences, whose extistence, if demonstrated would contravene no physical laws; the field does not deserve to be lumped in with the 'paranormal' (Ufology, parapsychology etc), especially as the field has a limited presence in mainstream peer reviewed journals - which is more than can be said for most 'paranormal' fields. I understand however the reservations of those who don't want it listed as a zoological subfield, but it must be realized that the zoology template is a far more appropriate place to list it than the paranormal one. For the time being what say we leave cryptozoology in the zoology template and give it the benefit of the doubt?
The second issue that I would like to raise concerns the inclusion of seperate listings for Myrmecology and Apiology (the scientific study of bees and ants respectively). Both of these are sub-branches of Entomology, which I also see is listed seperately. If we are listing discrete subranches of entomology, then why not include lepidoptology (the study of butterflies and moths) or coleoptology (the study of beetles)? For consistencies sake, I have removed these two entries as they seem to be redundant in the context of the one for entomology.   —Preceding unsigned comment added by 134.219.166.67 (talk) 23:25, 23 June 2008 (UTC)[reply]

Neuroethology?
Does neuroethology belong under the zoology header or under the neuroscience header? Jasongallant 20:13, 2 November 2007 (UTC)[reply]

image
this is a terrible picture for entomology. there should be an insect that looks like a classic insect, not an insect that looks like a plant sitting on a leaf! 66.92.134.109 (talk) 17:01, 1 May 2008 (UTC)[reply]

Cryptozoology?
Why is this on the template? It's not considered a serious branch of zoology, and it's misleading to put it up with the real sciences. -- MisterHand 03:18, 27 April 2006 (UTC)[reply]

Cryptozoology is a branch of Zoology. Like all sciences, it attempts to use evidence and facts, as well as eyewitness reports, in an attempt to find out if a hypothesized thing exists (in this case, an obscure species). Since it uses the scientific method, and attempts to seek knowledge using logic, it is a science. It is not a pseudoscience. Saying so would be even more misleading and a slap in the face to cryptozoologists everywhere. Perhaps seperating the template into sections of "Traditional zoologies", "obscure zoologies", etc. would be more fair and accurate?
-Alex, 74.130.207.209 05:03, 12 May 2006 (UTC).[reply]

im with Alex on this one, cryptozoology, like the others, is merely the study of so called "fictional" creatures.
shouldnt that be enough to allow it on the zoology page?

WolfCub88 19:44, 24 May 2007 (UTC)[reply]


WolfCub and others- the inclusion of cryptozoology is not an appropriate inclusion under the header of zoology.  I am in agreement with MisterHand that there is no consideration of 'Cryptozoology' as a credible scientific enterprise, and there is no discussion of it as a tenable field in the scientific literature.

Jasongallant 20:13, 2 November 2007 (UTC)[reply]

I've noticed that Cryptozoology keeps getting added and removed and added and removed from the template. I suspect that this will keep happening. I am not going to enter the debate of whether it should be in the template or not, but I am going to ask that IF you do add it in again (or any other type of zoology for that matter), please stick with the alphabetical format of the template instead of just tacking it on the end. Thanks.
-AJseagull1 (talk) 20:02, 17 March 2008 (UTC)[reply]

To summarize the points I have made above, I offer the following criterion that must be met by those wishing to include cryptozoology in this template.  The standard for inclusion in Wikipedia is the inclusion of reputable citations.  The standard for inclusion in this template should thus be a body of citations showing that cryptozoology is an accepted field of publication within mainstream, peer-reviewed zoology journals.  If these cannot be produced, cryptozoology itself may still meet notability for coverage in wikipedia by publications showing that it is a notable fringe theory or pseudoscience.  However, in that case it would not be reasonably eligible for inclusion in this template.  A good place to look for the type of references produced on this subject by the wikipedia community should be the article Cryptozoology.  This article does not include substantial references to cryptozoological articles published in mainstream biology journals.  On the other hand, it does include several references specifically suggesting that cryptozoology does not fall within the body of mainstream biology.  Just as much as for any other part of wikipedia, a template should be based on a cited body of knowledge.  If you wish to keep cryptozoology in this template, please therefore produce appropriate citations of the sort I have described above, or otherwise respond to this point.
Locke9k (talk) 23:06, 4 March 2009 (UTC)[reply]

Template doesn't show in Primatology
I found the zoology template useful to page to the various branches but the template doesn't exist on the Priatology page. I'm new so I didn't dare try to add it. Fablesx2 10:51, 14 June 2007 (UTC)[reply]

Others?
Why aren't there other branches of zoology on this template, like Planktology or Conchology? They should be there too if subbranches like Apiology and Myrmecology are there. Yvesnimmo 16:51, 1 July 2007 (UTC)[reply]

Layout
I added a relevant image to Cetology. The layout then became awkward. It seems that this template is meant to be placed in top right corner. But that implies that all the branches are to have a picture of a fox in their top right corner. That is not reasonable. Each article should have an image of something from that speciality in the prominent spot. --Etxrge 06:56, 21 September 2007 (UTC)[reply]

Notable Zoologists
How is it decided which notable zoologists are included in the zoology template, and which are only listed on the zoology entry page or the list of zoolosits page? As of this post the list in the template is: Georges Cuvier, Charles Darwin, William Kirby, Carolus Linnaeus, Konrad Lorenz, Thomas Say. Who decides that they are template worthy, but scientists like Richard Dawkins, Thomas Henry Huxley, Alfred R. Wallace, and E.O. WIlson are not...Why not have a link ot the list of notable zoologists instead or arbitrarily picking a few to put in the template?AJseagull1 (talk) 21:37, 19 November 2007 (UTC)[reply]

Template width
Hello. With smaller screens/windows, this template as it currently stands is too wide. Could a picture with only two creatures per row be used instead, please? 212.84.103.144 (talk) 05:18, 24 June 2010 (UTC)[reply]

File:Animal diversity.png
I have recently created the following collage of various animals which much better represents animal diversity (18 classes in 13 phyla) than the current image (nine classes, seven of them vertebrate, in three phyla). 

μηδείς (talk) 06:18, 31 January 2011 (UTC)[reply]



If there are no good reasons not too, I will substitute the image shortly. μηδείς (talk) 15:56, 31 January 2011 (UTC)[reply]

Key topics section
It needs a section that covers key terms and concepts. I am not a scientist so I do not know what is considered most key to zoology. --Harizotoh9 (talk) 10:46, 6 March 2012 (UTC)[reply]

